
DagonBytes HomePage - Goth Radio - Vampire Site - Library of the Classics -
Graveyards - Frite on Film

DarkArt - Edgar Allan Poe - Dagon TV - Email - Site map


At the Mountains of Madness

by H. P. Lovecraft

Written in March of 1931


HomePage -The Library -Classic Vampire Literature -Historical Vampires Dracula
- Frankenstein - H.P. Lovecraft - Dr. Jekyll - Dorian Gray Edgar Allan Poe -
Phantom of the Opera - Hunchback of Notre Dame - Dante's Inferno At the
Mountains of Madness

I

I am forced into speech because men of science have refused to follow my
advice without knowing why. It is altogether against my will that I tell my
reasons for opposing this contemplated invasion of the antarctic - with its
vast fossil hunt and its wholesale boring and melting of the ancient ice
caps. And I am the more reluctant because my warning may be in vain.

Doubt of the real facts, as I must reveal them, is inevitable; yet, if I
suppressed what will seem extravagant and incredible, there would be nothing
left. The hitherto withheld photographs, both ordinary and aerial, will count
in my favor, for they are damnably vivid and graphic. Still, they will be
doubted because of the great lengths to which clever fakery can be
carried. The ink drawings, of course, will be jeered at as obvious impostures,
notwithstanding a strangeness of technique which art experts ought to remark
and puzzle over.

In the end I must rely on the judgment and standing of the few scientific
leaders who have, on the one hand, sufficient independence of thought to weigh
my data on its own hideously convincing merits or in the light of certain
primordial and highly baffling myth cycles; and on the other hand, sufficient
influence to deter the exploring world in general from any rash and
over-ambitious program in the region of those mountains of madness. It is an
unfortunate fact that relatively obscure men like myself and my associates,
connected only with a small university, have little chance of making an
impression where matters of a wildly bizarre or highly controversial nature
are concerned.

It is further against us that we are not, in the strictest sense, specialists
in the fields which came primarily to be concerned. As a geologist, my object
in leading the Miskatonic University Expedition was wholly that of securing
deep-level specimens of rock and soil from various parts of the antarctic
continent, aided by the remarkable drill devised by Professor Frank H. Pabodie
of our engineering department. I had no wish to be a pioneer in any other
field than this, but I did hope that the use of this new mechanical appliance
at different points along previously explored paths would bring to light
materials of a sort hitherto unreached by the ordinary methods of collection.

Pabodie’s drilling apparatus, as the public already knows from our reports,
was unique and radical in its lightness, portability, and capacity to combine
the ordinary artesian drill principle with the principle of the small circular
rock drill in such a way as to cope quickly with strata of varying
hardness. Steel head, jointed rods, gasoline motor, collapsible wooden
derrick, dynamiting paraphernalia, cording, rubbish-removal auger, and
sectional piping for bores five inches wide and up to one thousand feet deep
all formed, with needed accessories, no greater load than three seven-dog
sledges could carry. This was made possible by the clever aluminum alloy of
which most of the metal objects were fashioned. Four large Dornier aeroplanes,
designed especially for the tremendous altitude flying necessary on the
antarctic plateau and with added fuel-warming and quick-starting devices
worked out by Pabodie, could transport our entire expedition from a base at
the edge of the great ice barrier to various suitable inland points, and from
these points a sufficient quota of dogs would serve us.

We planned to cover as great an area as one antarctic season - or longer, if
absolutely necessary - would permit, operating mostly in the mountain ranges
and on the plateau south of Ross Sea; regions explored in varying degree by
Shackleton, Amundsen, Scott, and Byrd. With frequent changes of camp, made by
aeroplane and involving distances great enough to be of geological
significance, we expected to unearth a quite unprecedented amount of material
- especially in the pre-Cambrian strata of which so narrow a range of
antarctic specimens had previously been secured. We wished also to obtain as
great as possible a variety of the upper fossiliferous rocks, since the primal
life history of this bleak realm of ice and death is of the highest importance
to our knowledge of the earth’s past. That the antarctic continent was once
temperate and even tropical, with a teeming vegetable and animal life of which
the lichens, marine fauna, arachnida, and penguins of the northern edge are
the only survivals, is a matter of common information; and we hoped to expand
that information in variety, accuracy, and detail. When a simple boring
revealed fossiliferous signs, we would enlarge the aperture by blasting, in
order to get specimens of suitable size and condition.

Our borings, of varying depth according to the promise held out by the upper
soil or rock, were to be confined to exposed, or nearly exposed, land surfaces
- these inevitably being slopes and ridges because of the mile or two-mile
thickness of solid ice overlying the lower levels. We could not afford to
waste drilling the depth of any considerable amount of mere glaciation, though
Pabodie had worked out a plan for sinking copper electrodes in thick clusters
of borings and melting off limited areas of ice with current from a
gasoline-driven dynamo. It is this plan - which we could not put into effect
except experimentally on an expedition such as ours - that the coming
Starkweather-Moore Expedition proposes to follow, despite the warnings I have
issued since our return from the antarctic.

The public knows of the Miskatonic Expedition through our frequent wireless
reports to the Arkham Advertiser and Associated Press, and through the later
articles of Pabodie and myself. We consisted of four men from the University -
Pabodie, Lake of the biology department, Atwood of the physics department -
also a meteorologist - and myself, representing geology and having nominal
command - besides sixteen assistants: seven graduate students from Miskatonic
and nine skilled mechanics. Of these sixteen, twelve were qualified aeroplane
pilots, all but two of whom were competent wireless operators. Eight of them
understood navigation with compass and sextant, as did Pabodie, Atwood, and
I. In addition, of course, our two ships - wooden ex-whalers, reinforced for
ice conditions and having auxiliary steam - were fully manned.

The Nathaniel Derby Pickman Foundation, aided by a few special contributions,
financed the expedition; hence our preparations were extremely thorough,
despite the absence of great publicity. The dogs, sledges, machines, camp
materials, and unassembled parts of our five planes were delivered in Boston,
and there our ships were loaded. We were marvelously well-equipped for our
specific purposes, and in all matters pertaining to supplies, regimen,
transportation, and camp construction we profited by the excellent example of
our many recent and exceptionally brilliant predecessors. It was the unusual
number and fame of these predecessors which made our own expedition - ample
though it was - so little noticed by the world at large.

As the newspapers told, we sailed from Boston Harbor on September 2nd, 1930,
taking a leisurely course down the coast and through the Panama Canal, and
stopping at Samoa and Hobart, Tasmania, at which latter place we took on final
supplies. None of our exploring party had ever been in the polar regions
before, hence we all relied greatly on our ship captains - J. B. Douglas,
commanding the brig Arkham, and serving as commander of the sea party, and
Georg Thorfinnssen, commanding the barque Miskatonic - both veteran whalers in
antarctic waters.

As we left the inhabited world behind, the sun sank lower and lower in the
north, and stayed longer and longer above the horizon each day. At about 62°
South Latitude we sighted our first icebergs - table-like objects with
vertical sides - and just before reaching the antarctic circle, which we
crossed on October 20th with appropriately quaint ceremonies, we were
considerably troubled with field ice. The falling temperature bothered me
considerably after our long voyage through the tropics, but I tried to brace
up for the worse rigors to come. On many occasions the curious atmospheric
effects enchanted me vastly; these including a strikingly vivid mirage - the
first I had ever seen - in which distant bergs became the battlements of
unimaginable cosmic castles.

Pushing through the ice, which was fortunately neither extensive nor thickly
packed, we regained open water at South Latitude 67°, East Longitude 175°. On
the morning of October 26th a strong land blink appeared on the south, and
before noon we all felt a thrill of excitement at beholding a vast, lofty, and
snow-clad mountain chain which opened out and covered the whole vista
ahead. At last we had encountered an outpost of the great unknown continent
and its cryptic world of frozen death. These peaks were obviously the
Admiralty Range discovered by Ross, and it would now be our task to round Cape
Adare and sail down the east coast of Victoria Land to our contemplated base
on the shore of McMurdo Sound, at the foot of the volcano Erebus in South
Latitude 77° 9'.

The last lap of the voyage was vivid and fancy-stirring. Great barren peaks of
mystery loomed up constantly against the west as the low northern sun of noon
or the still lower horizon-grazing southern sun of midnight poured its hazy
reddish rays over the white snow, bluish ice and water lanes, and black bits
of exposed granite slope. Through the desolate summits swept ranging,
intermittent gusts of the terrible antarctic wind; whose cadences sometimes
held vague suggestions of a wild and half-sentient musical piping, with notes
extending over a wide range, and which for some subconscious mnemonic reason
seemed to me disquieting and even dimly terrible. Something about the scene
reminded me of the strange and disturbing Asian paintings of Nicholas Roerich,
and of the still stranger and more disturbing descriptions of the evilly
fabled plateau of Leng which occur in the dreaded Necronomicon of the mad Arab
Abdul Alhazred. I was rather sorry, later on, that I had ever looked into that
monstrous book at the college library.

On the 7th of November, sight of the westward range having been temporarily
lost, we passed Franklin Island; and the next day descried the cones of
Mts. Erebus and Terror on Ross Island ahead, with the long line of the Parry
Mountains beyond. There now stretched off to the east the low, white line of
the great ice barrier, rising perpendicularly to a height of two hundred feet
like the rocky cliffs of Quebec, and marking the end of southward
navigation. In the afternoon we entered McMurdo Sound and stood off the coast
in the lee of smoking Mt. Erebus. The scoriac peak towered up some twelve
thousand, seven hundred feet against the eastern sky, like a Japanese print of
the sacred Fujiyama, while beyond it rose the white, ghostlike height of
Mt. Terror, ten thousand, nine hundred feet in altitude, and now extinct as a
volcano.

Puffs of smoke from Erebus came intermittently, and one of the graduate
assistants - a brilliant young fellow named Danforth - pointed out what looked
like lava on the snowy slope, remarking that this mountain, discovered in
1840, had undoubtedly been the source of Poe’s image when he wrote seven years
later:

- the lavas that restlessly roll Their sulphurous currents down Yaanek In the
ultimate climes of the pole - That groan as they roll down Mount Yaanek In the
realms of the boreal pole.

Danforth was a great reader of bizarre material, and had talked a good deal of
Poe. I was interested myself because of the antarctic scene of Poe’s only long
story - the disturbing and enigmatical Arthur Gordon Pym. On the barren shore,
and on the lofty ice barrier in the background, myriads of grotesque penguins
squawked and flapped their fins, while many fat seals were visible on the
water, swimming or sprawling across large cakes of slowly drifting ice.

Using small boats, we effected a difficult landing on Ross Island shortly
after midnight on the morning of the 9th, carrying a line of cable from each
of the ships and preparing to unload supplies by means of a breeches-buoy
arrangement. Our sensations on first treading Antarctic soil were poignant and
complex, even though at this particular point the Scott and Shackleton
expeditions had preceded us. Our camp on the frozen shore below the volcano’s
slope was only a provisional one, headquarters being kept aboard the
Arkham. We landed all our drilling apparatus, dogs, sledges, tents,
provisions, gasoline tanks, experimental ice-melting outfit, cameras, both
ordinary and aerial, aeroplane parts, and other accessories, including three
small portable wireless outfits - besides those in the planes - capable of
communicating with the Arkham’s large outfit from any part of the antarctic
continent that we would be likely to visit. The ship’s outfit, communicating
with the outside world, was to convey press reports to the Arkham Advertiser's
powerful wireless station on Kingsport Head, Massachusetts. We hoped to
complete our work during a single antarctic summer; but if this proved
impossible, we would winter on the Arkham, sending the Miskatonic north before
the freezing of the ice for another summer’s supplies.

I need not repeat what the newspapers have already published about our early
work: of our ascent of Mt. Erebus; our successful mineral borings at several
points on Ross Island and the singular speed with which Pabodie’s apparatus
accomplished them, even through solid rock layers; our provisional test of the
small ice-melting equipment; our perilous ascent of the great barrier with
sledges and supplies; and our final assembling of five huge aeroplanes at the
camp atop the barrier. The health of our land party - twenty men and
fifty-five Alaskan sledge dogs - was remarkable, though of course we had so
far encountered no really destructive temperatures or windstorms. For the most
part, the thermometer varied between zero and 20° or 25° above, and our
experience with New England winters had accustomed us to rigors of this
sort. The barrier camp was semi-permanent, and destined to be a storage cache
for gasoline, provisions, dynamite, and other supplies.

Only four of our planes were needed to carry the actual exploring material,
the fifth being left with a pilot and two men from the ships at the storage
cache to form a means of reaching us from the Arkham in case all our exploring
planes were lost. Later, when not using all the other planes for moving
apparatus, we would employ one or two in a shuttle transportation service
between this cache and another permanent base on the great plateau from six
hundred to seven hundred miles southward, beyond Beardmore Glacier. Despite
the almost unanimous accounts of appalling winds and tempests that pour down
from the plateau, we determined to dispense with intermediate bases, taking
our chances in the interest of economy and probable efficiency.

Wireless reports have spoken of the breathtaking, four-hour, nonstop flight of
our squadron on November 21st over the lofty shelf ice, with vast peaks rising
on the west, and the unfathomed silences echoing to the sound of our
engines. Wind troubled us only moderately, and our radio compasses helped us
through the one opaque fog we encountered. When the vast rise loomed ahead,
between Latitudes 83° and 84°, we knew we had reached Beardmore Glacier, the
largest valley glacier in the world, and that the frozen sea was now giving
place to a frowning and mountainous coast line. At last we were truly entering
the white, aeon-dead world of the ultimate south. Even as we realized it we
saw the peak of Mt. Nansen in the eastern distance, towering up to its height
of almost fifteen thousand feet.

The successful establishment of the southern base above the glacier in
Latitude 86° 7’, East Longitude 174° 23’, and the phenomenally rapid and
effective borings and blastings made at various points reached by our sledge
trips and short aeroplane flights, are matters of history; as is the arduous
and triumphant ascent of Mt. Nansen by Pabodie and two of the graduate
students - Gedney and Carroll - on December 13 - 15. We were some eight
thousand, five hundred feet above sea-level, and when experimental drillings
revealed solid ground only twelve feet down through the snow and ice at
certain points, we made considerable use of the small melting apparatus and
sunk bores and performed dynamiting at many places where no previous explorer
had ever thought of securing mineral specimens. The pre-Cambrian granites and
beacon sandstones thus obtained confirmed our belief that this plateau was
homogeneous, with the great bulk of the continent to the west, but somewhat
different from the parts lying eastward below South America - which we then
thought to form a separate and smaller continent divided from the larger one
by a frozen junction of Ross and Weddell Seas, though Byrd has since disproved
the hypothesis.

In certain of the sandstones, dynamited and chiseled after boring revealed
their nature, we found some highly interesting fossil markings and fragments;
notably ferns, seaweeds, trilobites, crinoids, and such mollusks as linguellae
and gastropods - all of which seemed of real significance in connection with
the region’s primordial history. There was also a queer triangular, striated
marking, about a foot in greatest diameter, which Lake pieced together from
three fragments of slate brought up from a deep-blasted aperture. These
fragments came from a point to the westward, near the Queen Alexandra Range;
and Lake, as a biologist, seemed to find their curious marking unusually
puzzling and provocative, though to my geological eye it looked not unlike
some of the ripple effects reasonably common in the sedimentary rocks. Since
slate is no more than a metamorphic formation into which a sedimentary stratum
is pressed, and since the pressure itself produces odd distorting effects on
any markings which may exist, I saw no reason for extreme wonder over the
striated depression.

On January 6th, 1931, Lake, Pabodie, Danforth, the other six students, and
myself flew directly over the south pole in two of the great planes, being
forced down once by a sudden high wind, which, fortunately, did not develop
into a typical storm. This was, as the papers have stated, one of several
observation flights, during others of which we tried to discern new
topographical features in areas unreached by previous explorers. Our early
flights were disappointing in this latter respect, though they afforded us
some magnificent examples of the richly fantastic and deceptive mirages of the
polar regions, of which our sea voyage had given us some brief
foretastes. Distant mountains floated in the sky as enchanted cities, and
often the whole white world would dissolve into a gold, silver, and scarlet
land of Dunsanian dreams and adventurous expectancy under the magic of the low
midnight sun. On cloudy days we had considerable trouble in flying owing to
the tendency of snowy earth and sky to merge into one mystical opalescent void
with no visible horizon to mark the junction of the two.

At length we resolved to carry out our original plan of flying five hundred
miles eastward with all four exploring planes and establishing a fresh
sub-base at a point which would probably be on the smaller continental
division, as we mistakenly conceived it. Geological specimens obtained there
would be desirable for purposes of comparison. Our health so far had remained
excellent - lime juice well offsetting the steady diet of tinned and salted
food, and temperatures generally above zero enabling us to do without our
thickest furs. It was now midsummer, and with haste and care we might be able
to conclude work by March and avoid a tedious wintering through the long
antarctic night. Several savage windstorms had burst upon us from the west,
but we had escaped damage through the skill of Atwood in devising rudimentary
aeroplane shelters and windbreaks of heavy snow blocks, and reinforcing the
principal camp buildings with snow. Our good luck and efficiency had indeed
been almost uncanny.

The outside world knew, of course, of our program, and was told also of Lake’s
strange and dogged insistence on a westward - or rather, northwestward -
prospecting trip before our radical shift to the new base. It seems that he
had pondered a great deal, and with alarmingly radical daring, over that
triangular striated marking in the slate; reading into it certain
contradictions in nature and geological period which whetted his curiosity to
the utmost, and made him avid to sink more borings and blastings in the
west-stretching formation to which the exhumed fragments evidently
belonged. He was strangely convinced that the marking was the print of some
bulky, unknown, and radically unclassifiable organism of considerably advanced
evolution, notwithstanding that the rock which bore it was of so vastly
ancient a date - Cambrian if not actually pre-Cambrian - as to preclude the
probable existence not only of all highly evolved life, but of any life at all
above the unicellular or at most the trilobite stage. These fragments, with
their odd marking, must have been five hundred million to a thousand million
years old.

II

Popular imagination, I judge, responded actively to our wireless bulletins of
Lake’s start northwestward into regions never trodden by human foot or
penetrated by human imagination, though we did not mention his wild hopes of
revolutionizing the entire sciences of biology and geology. His preliminary
sledging and boring journey of January 11th to 18th with Pabodie and five
others - marred by the loss of two dogs in an upset when crossing one of the
great pressure ridges in the ice - had brought up more and more of the
Archaean slate; and even I was interested by the singular profusion of evident
fossil markings in that unbelievably ancient stratum. These markings, however,
were of very primitive life forms involving no great paradox except that any
life forms should occur in rock as definitely pre-Cambrian as this seemed to
be; hence I still failed to see the good sense of Lake’s demand for an
interlude in our time-saving program - an interlude requiring the use of all
four planes, many men, and the whole of the expedition’s mechanical
apparatus. I did not, in the end, veto the plan, though I decided not to
accompany the northwestward party despite Lake’s plea for my geological
advice. While they were gone, I would remain at the base with Pabodie and five
men and work out final plans for the eastward shift. In preparation for this
transfer, one of the planes had begun to move up a good gasoline supply from
McMurdo Sound; but this could wait temporarily. I kept with me one sledge and
nine dogs, since it is unwise to be at any time without possible
transportation in an utterly tenantless world of aeon-long death.

Lake’s sub-expedition into the unknown, as everyone will recall, sent out its
own reports from the shortwave transmitters on the planes; these being
simultaneously picked up by our apparatus at the southern base and by the
Arkham at McMurdo Sound, whence they were relayed to the outside world on wave
lengths up to fifty meters. The start was made January 22nd at 4 A.M., and the
first wireless message we received came only two hours later, when Lake spoke
of descending and starting a small-scale ice-melting and bore at a point some
three hundred miles away from us. Six hours after that a second and very
excited message told of the frantic, beaver-like work whereby a shallow shaft
had been sunk and blasted, culminating in the discovery of slate fragments
with several markings approximately like the one which had caused the original
puzzlement.

Three hours later a brief bulletin announced the resumption of the flight in
the teeth of a raw and piercing gale; and when I dispatched a message of
protest against further hazards, Lake replied curtly that his new specimens
made any hazard worth taking. I saw that his excitement had reached the point
of mutiny, and that I could do nothing to check this headlong risk of the
whole expedition’s success; but it was appalling to think of his plunging
deeper and deeper into that treacherous and sinister white immensity of
tempests and unfathomed mysteries which stretched off for some fifteen hundred
miles to the half-known, half-suspected coast line of Queen Mary and Knox
Lands.

Then, in about an hour and a half more, came that doubly excited message from
Lake’s moving plane, which almost reversed my sentiments and made me wish I
had accompanied the party:

"10:05 P.M. On the wing. After snowstorm, have spied mountain range ahead
higher than any hitherto seen. May equal Himalayas, allowing for height of
plateau. Probable Latitude 76° 15’, Longitude 113° 10’ E. Reaches far as can
see to right and left. Suspicion of two smoking cones. All peaks black and
bare of snow. Gale blowing off them impedes navigation."

After that Pabodie, the men and I hung breathlessly over the receiver. Thought
of this titanic mountain rampart seven hundred miles away inflamed our deepest
sense of adventure; and we rejoiced that our expedition, if not ourselves
personally, had been its discoverers. In half an hour Lake called us again:

"Moulton's plane forced down on plateau in foothills, but nobody hurt and
perhaps can repair. Shall transfer essentials to other three for return or
further moves if necessary, but no more heavy plane travel needed just
now. Mountains surpass anything in imagination. Am going up scouting in
Carroll’s plane, with all weight out.

"You can’t imagine anything like this. Highest peaks must go over thirty-five
thousand feet. Everest out of the running. Atwood to work out height with
theodolite while Carroll and I go up. Probably wrong about cones, for
formations look stratified. Possibly pre-Cambrian slate with other strata
mixed in. Queer skyline effects - regular sections of cubes clinging to
highest peaks. Whole thing marvelous in red-gold light of low sun. Like land
of mystery in a dream or gateway to forbidden world of untrodden wonder. Wish
you were here to study."

Though it was technically sleeping time, not one of us listeners thought for a
moment of retiring. It must have been a good deal the same at McMurdo Sound,
where the supply cache and the Arkham were also getting the messages; for
Captain Douglas gave out a call congratulating everybody on the important
find, and Sherman, the cache operator, seconded his sentiments. We were sorry,
of course, about the damaged aeroplane, but hoped it could be easily
mended. Then, at 11 P.M., came another call from Lake:

"Up with Carroll over highest foothills. Don’t dare try really tall peaks in
present weather, but shall later. Frightful work climbing, and hard going at
this altitude, but worth it. Great range fairly solid, hence can’t get any
glimpses beyond. Main summits exceed Himalayas, and very queer. Range looks
like pre-Cambrian slate, with plain signs of many other upheaved strata. Was
wrong about volcanism. Goes farther in either direction than we can see. Swept
clear of snow above about twenty-one thousand feet.

"Odd formations on slopes of highest mountains. Great low square blocks with
exactly vertical sides, and rectangular lines of low, vertical ramparts, like
the old Asian castles clinging to steep mountains in Roerich’s
paintings. Impressive from distance. Flew close to some, and Carroll thought
they were formed of smaller separate pieces, but that is probably
weathering. Most edges crumbled and rounded off as if exposed to storms and
climate changes for millions of years.

"Parts, especially upper parts, seem to be of lighter-colored rock than any
visible strata on slopes proper, hence of evidently crystalline origin. Close
flying shows many cave mouths, some unusually regular in outline, square or
semicircular. You must come and investigate. Think I saw rampart squarely on
top of one peak. Height seems about thirty thousand to thirty-five thousand
feet. Am up twenty-one thousand, five hundred myself, in devilish, gnawing
cold. Wind whistles and pipes through passes and in and out of caves, but no
flying danger so far."

From then on for another half hour Lake kept up a running fire of comment, and
expressed his intention of climbing some of the peaks on foot. I replied that
I would join him as soon as he could send a plane, and that Pabodie and I
would work out the best gasoline plan - just where and how to concentrate our
supply in view of the expedition’s altered character. Obviously, Lake’s boring
operations, as well as his aeroplane activities, would require a great deal
for the new base which he planned to establish at the foot of the mountains;
and it was possible that the eastward flight might not be made, after all,
this season. In connection with this business I called Captain Douglas and
asked him to get as much as possible out of the ships and up the barrier with
the single dog team we had left there. A direct route across the unknown
region between Lake and McMurdo Sound was what we really ought to establish.

Lake called me later to say that he had decided to let the camp stay where
Moulton’s plane had been forced down, and where repairs had already progressed
somewhat. The ice sheet was very thin, with dark ground here and there
visible, and he would sink some borings and blasts at that very point before
making any sledge trips or climbing expeditions. He spoke of the ineffable
majesty of the whole scene, and the queer state of his sensations at being in
the lee of vast, silent pinnacles whose ranks shot up like a wall reaching the
sky at the world’s rim. Atwood’s theodolite observations had placed the height
of the five tallest peaks at from thirty thousand to thirty-four thousand
feet. The windswept nature of the terrain clearly disturbed Lake, for it
argued the occasional existence of prodigious gales, violent beyond anything
we had so far encountered. His camp lay a little more than five miles from
where the higher foothills rose abruptly. I could almost trace a note of
subconscious alarm in his words-flashed across a glacial void of seven hundred
miles - as he urged that we all hasten with the matter and get the strange,
new region disposed of as soon as possible. He was about to rest now, after a
continuous day’s work of almost unparalleled speed, strenuousness, and
results.

In the morning I had a three-cornered wireless talk with Lake and Captain
Douglas at their widely separated bases. It was agreed that one of Lake’s
planes would come to my base for Pabodie, the five men, and myself, as well as
for all the fuel it could carry. The rest of the fuel question, depending on
our decision about an easterly trip, could wait for a few days, since Lake had
enough for immediate camp heat and borings. Eventually the old southern base
ought to be restocked, but if we postponed the easterly trip we would not use
it till the next summer, and, meanwhile, Lake must send a plane to explore a
direct route between his new mountains and McMurdo Sound.

Pabodie and I prepared to close our base for a short or long period, as the
case might be. If we wintered in the antarctic we would probably fly straight
from Lake’s base to the Arkham without returning to this spot. Some of our
conical tents had already been reinforced by blocks of hard snow, and now we
decided to complete the job of making a permanent village. Owing to a very
liberal tent supply, Lake had with him all that his base would need, even
after our arrival. I wirelessed that Pabodie and I would be ready for the
northwestward move after one day’s work and one night’s rest.

Our labors, however, were not very steady after 4 P.M., for about that time
Lake began sending in the most extraordinary and excited messages. His working
day had started unpropitiously, since an aeroplane survey of the
nearly-exposed rock surfaces showed an entire absence of those Archaean and
primordial strata for which he was looking, and which formed so great a part
of the colossal peaks that loomed up at a tantalizing distance from the
camp. Most of the rocks glimpsed were apparently Jurassic and Comanchian
sandstones and Permian and Triassic schists, with now and then a glossy black
outcropping suggesting a hard and slaty coal. This rather discouraged Lake,
whose plans all hinged on unearthing specimens more than five hundred million
years older. It was clear to him that in order to recover the Archaean slate
vein in which he had found the odd markings, he would have to make a long
sledge trip from these foothills to the steep slopes of the gigantic mountains
themselves.

He had resolved, nevertheless, to do some local boring as part of the
expedition’s general program; hence he set up the drill and put five men to
work with it while the rest finished settling the camp and repairing the
damaged aeroplane. The softest visible rock - a sandstone about a quarter of a
mile from the camp - had been chosen for the first sampling; and the drill
made excellent progress without much supplementary blasting. It was about
three hours afterward, following the first really heavy blast of the
operation, that the shouting of the drill crew was heard; and that young
Gedney - the acting foreman - rushed into the camp with the startling news.

They had struck a cave. Early in the boring the sandstone had given place to a
vein of Comanchian limestone, full of minute fossil cephalopods, corals,
echini, and spirifera, and with occasional suggestions of siliceous sponges
and marine vertebrate bones - the latter probably of teleosts, sharks, and
ganoids. This, in itself, was important enough, as affording the first
vertebrate fossils the expedition had yet secured; but when shortly afterward
the drill head dropped through the stratum into apparent vacancy, a wholly new
and doubly intense wave of excitement spread among the excavators. A
good-sized blast had laid open the subterrene secret; and now, through a
jagged aperture perhaps five feet across and three feet thick, there yawned
before the avid searchers a section of shallow limestone hollowing worn more
than fifty million years ago by the trickling ground waters of a bygone tropic
world.

The hollowed layer was not more than seven or eight feet deep but extended off
indefinitely in all directions and had a fresh, slightly moving air which
suggested its membership in an extensive subterranean system. Its roof and
floor were abundantly equipped with large stalactites and stalagmites, some of
which met in columnar form: but important above all else was the vast deposit
of shells and bones, which in places nearly choked the passage. Washed down
from unknown jungles of Mesozoic tree ferns and fungi, and forests of Tertiary
cycads, fan palms, and primitive angiosperms, this osseous medley contained
representatives of more Cretaceous, Eocene, and other animal species than the
greatest paleontologist could have counted or classified in a year. Mollusks,
crustacean armor, fishes, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and early mammals -
great and small, known and unknown. No wonder Gedney ran back to the camp
shouting, and no wonder everyone else dropped work and rushed headlong through
the biting cold to where the tall derrick marked a new-found gateway to
secrets of inner earth and vanished aeons.

When Lake had satisfied the first keen edge of his curiosity, he scribbled a
message in his notebook and had young Moulton run back to the camp to dispatch
it by wireless. This was my first word of the discovery, and it told of the
identification of early shells, bones of ganoids and placoderms, remnants of
labyrinthodonts and thecodonts, great mosasaur skull fragments, dinosaur
vertebrae and armor plates, pterodactyl teeth and wing bones, Archaeopteryx
debris, Miocene sharks’ teeth, primitive bird skulls, and other bones of
archaic mammals such as palaeotheres, Xiphodons, Eohippi, Oreodons, and
titanotheres. There was nothing as recent as a mastodon, elephant, true camel,
deer, or bovine animal; hence Lake concluded that the last deposits had
occurred during the Oligocene Age, and that the hollowed stratum had lain in
its present dried, dead, and inaccessible state for at least thirty million
years.

On the other hand, the prevalence of very early life forms was singular in the
highest degree. Though the limestone formation was, on the evidence of such
typical imbedded fossils as ventriculites, positively and unmistakably
Comanchian and not a particle earlier, the free fragments in the hollow space
included a surprising proportion from organisms hitherto considered as
peculiar to far older periods - even rudimentary fishes, mollusks, and corals
as remote as the Silunan or Ordovician. The inevitable inference was that in
this part of the world there had been a remarkable and unique degree of
continuity between the life of over three hundred million years ago and that
of only thirty million years ago. How far this continuity had extended beyond
the Oligocene Age when the cavern was closed was of course past all
speculation. In any event, the coming of the frightful ice in the Pleistocene
some five hundred thousand years ago - a mere yesterday as compared with the
age of this cavity - must have put an end to any of the primal forms which had
locally managed to outlive their common terms.

Lake was not content to let his first message stand, but had another bulletin
written and dispatched across the snow to the camp before Moulton could get
back. After that Moulton stayed at the wireless in one of the planes,
transmitting to me - and to the Arkham for relaying to the outside world - the
frequent postscripts which Lake sent him by a succession of messengers. Those
who followed the newspapers will remember the excitement created among men of
science by that afternoon’s reports - reports which have finally led, after
all these years, to the organization of that very Starkweather-Moore
Expedition which I am so anxious to dissuade from its purposes. I had better
give the messages literally as Lake sent them, and as our base operator
McTighe translated them from the pencil shorthand:

"Fowler makes discovery of highest importance in sandstone and limestone
fragments from blasts. Several distinct triangular striated prints like those
in Archaean slate, proving that source survived from over six hundred million
years ago to Comanchian times without more than moderate morphological changes
and decrease in average size. Comanchian prints apparently more primitive or
decadent, if anything, than older ones. Emphasize importance of discovery in
press. Will mean to biology what Einstein has meant to mathematics and
physics. Joins up with my previous work and amplifies conclusions.

"Appears to indicate, as I suspected, that earth has seen whole cycle or
cycles of organic life before known one that begins with Archaeozoic
cells. Was evolved and specialized not later than a thousand million years
ago, when planet was young and recently uninhabitable for any life forms or
normal protoplasmic structure. Question arises when, where, and how
development took place."

"Later. Examining certain skeletal fragments of large land and marine saurians
and primitive mammals, find singular local wounds or injuries to bony
structure not attributable to any known predatory or carnivorous animal of any
period, of two sorts - straight, penetrant bores, and apparently hacking
incisions. One or two cases of cleanly severed bones. Not many specimens
affected. Am sending to camp for electric torches. Will extend search area
underground by hacking away stalactites."

"Still later. Have found peculiar soapstone fragment about six inches across
and an inch and a half thick, wholly unlike any visible local formation -
greenish, but no evidences to place its period. Has curious smoothness and
regularity. Shaped like five-pointed star with tips broken off, and signs of
other cleavage at inward angles and in center of surface. Small, smooth
depression in center of unbroken surface. Arouses much curiosity as to source
and weathering. Probably some freak of water action. Carroll, with magnifier,
thinks he can make out additional markings of geologic significance. Groups of
tiny dots in regular patterns. Dogs growing uneasy as we work, and seem to
hate this soapstone. Must see if it has any peculiar odor. Will report again
when Mills gets back with light and we start on underground area."

"10:15 P.M. Important discovery. Orrendorf and Watkins, working underground at
9:45 with light, found monstrous barrel-shaped fossil of wholly unknown
nature; probably vegetable unless overgrown specimen of unknown marine
radiata. Tissue evidently preserved by mineral salts. Tough as leather, but
astonishing flexibility retained in places. Marks of broken-off parts at ends
and around sides. Six feet end to end, three and five-tenths feet central
diameter, tapering to one foot at each end. Like a barrel with five bulging
ridges in place of staves. Lateral breakages, as of thinnish stalks, are at
equator in middle of these ridges. In furrows between ridges are curious
growths - combs or wings that fold up and spread out like fans. All greatly
damaged but one, which gives almost seven-foot wing spread. Arrangement
reminds one of certain monsters of primal myth, especially fabled Elder Things
in Necronomicon.

"Their wings seem to be membranous, stretched on frame work of glandular
tubing. Apparent minute orifices in frame tubing at wing tips. Ends of body
shriveled, giving no clue to interior or to what has been broken off
there. Must dissect when we get back to camp. Can’t decide whether vegetable
or animal. Many features obviously of almost incredible primitiveness. Have
set all hands cutting stalactites and looking for further
specimens. Additional scarred bones found, but these must wait. Having trouble
with dogs. They can’t endure the new specimen, and would probably tear it to
pieces if we didn’t keep it at a distance from them."

"11:30 P.M. Attention, Dyer, Pabodie, Douglas. Matter of highest - I might say
transcendent - importance. Arkham must relay to Kingsport Head Station at
once. Strange barrel growth is the Archaean thing that left prints in
rocks. Mills, Boudreau, and Fowler discover cluster of thirteen more at
underground point forty feet from aperture. Mixed with curiously rounded and
configured soapstone fragments smaller than one previously found -
star-shaped, but no marks of breakage except at some of the points.

"Of organic specimens, eight apparently perfect, with all appendages. Have
brought all to surface, leading off dogs to distance. They cannot stand the
things. Give close attention to description and repeat back for accuracy
Papers must get this right.

"Objects are eight feet long all over. Six-foot, five-ridged barrel torso
three and five-tenths feet central diameter, one foot end diameters. Dark
gray, flexible, and infinitely tough. Seven-foot membranous wings of same
color, found folded, spread out of furrows between ridges. Wing framework
tubular or glandular, of lighter gray, with orifices at wing tips. Spread
wings have serrated edge. Around equator, one at central apex of each of the
five vertical, stave-like ridges are five systems of light gray flexible arms
or tentacles found tightly folded to torso but expansible to maximum length of
over three feet. Like arms of primitive crinoid. Single stalks three inches
diameter branch after six inches into five substalks, each of which branches
after eight inches into small, tapering tentacles or tendrils, giving each
stalk a total of twenty-five tentacles.

"At top of torso blunt, bulbous neck of lighter gray, with gill-like
suggestions, holds yellowish five-pointed starfish-shaped apparent head
covered with three-inch wiry cilia of various prismatic colors.

"Head thick and puffy, about two feet point to point, with three-inch flexible
yellowish tubes projecting from each point. Slit in exact center of top
probably breathing aperture. At end of each tube is spherical expansion where
yellowish membrane rolls back on handling to reveal glassy, red-irised globe,
evidently an eye.

"Five slightly longer reddish tubes start from inner angles of starfish-shaped
head and end in saclike swellings of same color which, upon pressure, open to
bell-shaped orifices two inches maximum diameter and lined with sharp, white
tooth like projections - probably mouths. All these tubes, cilia, and points
of starfish head, found folded tightly down; tubes and points clinging to
bulbous neck and torso. Flexibility surprising despite vast toughness.

"At bottom of torso, rough but dissimilarly functioning counterparts of head
arrangements exist. Bulbous light-gray pseudo-neck, without gill suggestions,
holds greenish five-pointed starfish arrangement.

"Tough, muscular arms four feet long and tapering from seven inches diameter
at base to about two and five-tenths at point. To each point is attached small
end of a greenish five-veined membranous triangle eight inches long and six
wide at farther end. This is the paddle, fin, or pseudofoot which has made
prints in rocks from a thousand million to fifty or sixty million years old.

"From inner angles of starfish arrangement project two-foot reddish tubes
tapering from three inches diameter at base to one at tip. Orifices at
tips. All these parts infinitely tough and leathery, but extremely
flexible. Four-foot arms with paddles undoubtedly used for locomotion of some
sort, marine or otherwise. When moved, display suggestions of exaggerated
muscularity. As found, all these projections tightly folded over pseudoneck
and end of torso, corresponding to projections at other end.

"Cannot yet assign positively to animal or vegetable kingdom, but odds now
favor animal. Probably represents incredibly advanced evolution of radiata
without loss of certain primitive features. Echinoderm resemblances
unmistakable despite local contradictory evidences.

"Wing structure puzzles in view of probable marine habitat, but may have use
in water navigation. Symmetry is curiously vegetablelike, suggesting vegetable
's essential up-and-down structure rather than animal’s fore-and-aft
structure. Fabulously early date of evolution, preceding even simplest
Archaean protozoa hitherto known, baffles all conjecture as to origin.

"Complete specimens have such uncanny resemblance to certain creatures of
primal myth that suggestion of ancient existence outside antarctic becomes
inevitable. Dyer and Pabodie have read Necronomicon and seen Clark Ashton
Smith’s nightmare paintings based on text, and will understand when I speak of
Elder Things supposed to have created all earth life as jest or
mistake. Students have always thought conception formed from morbid
imaginative treatment of very ancient tropical radiata. Also like prehistoric
folklore things Wilmarth has spoken of - Cthulhu cult appendages, etc.

"Vast field of study opened. Deposits probably of late Cretaceous or early
Eocene period, judging from associated specimens. Massive stalagmites
deposited above them. Hard work hewing out, but toughness prevented
damage. State of preservation miraculous, evidently owing to limestone
action. No more found so far, but will resume search later. Job now to get
fourteen huge specimens to camp without dogs, which bark furiously and can’t
be trusted near them.

"With nine men - three left to guard the dogs - we ought to manage the three
sledges fairly well, though wind is bad. Must establish plane communication
with McMurdo Sound and begin shipping material. But I’ve got to dissect one of
these things before we take any rest. Wish I had a real laboratory here. Dyer
better kick himself for having tried to stop my westward trip. First the
world’s greatest mountains, and then this. If this last isn’t the high spot of
the expedition, I don’t know what is. We’re made scientifically. Congrats,
Pabodie, on the drill that opened up the cave. Now will Arkham please repeat
description?"

The sensations of Pabodie and myself at receipt of this report were almost
beyond description, nor were our companions much behind us in
enthusiasm. McTighe, who had hastily translated a few high spots as they came
from the droning receiving set, wrote out the entire message from his
shorthand version as soon as Lake’s operator signed off. All appreciated the
epoch-making significance of the discovery, and I sent Lake congratulations as
soon as the Arkham’s operator had repeated back the descriptive parts as
requested; and my example was followed by Sherman from his station at the
McMurdo Sound supply cache, as well as by Captain Douglas of the
Arkham. Later, as head of the expedition, I added some remarks to be relayed
through the Arkham to the outside world. Of course, rest was an absurd thought
amidst this excitement; and my only wish was to get to Lake’s camp as quickly
as I could. It disappointed me when he sent word that a rising mountain gale
made early aerial travel impossible.

But within an hour and a half interest again rose to banish
disappointment. Lake, sending more messages, told of the completely successful
transportation of the fourteen great specimens to the camp. It had been a hard
pull, for the things were surprisingly heavy; but nine men had accomplished it
very neatly. Now some of the party were hurriedly building a snow corral at a
safe distance from the camp, to which the dogs could be brought for greater
convenience in feeding. The specimens were laid out on the hard snow near the
camp, save for one on which Lake was making crude attempts at dissection.

This dissection seemed to be a greater task than had been expected, for,
despite the heat of a gasoline stove in the newly raised laboratory tent, the
deceptively flexible tissues of the chosen specimen - a powerful and intact
one - lost nothing of their more than leathery toughness. Lake was puzzled as
to how he might make the requisite incisions without violence destructive
enough to upset all the structural niceties he was looking for. He had, it is
true, seven more perfect specimens; but these were too few to use up
recklessly unless the cave might later yield an unlimited supply. Accordingly
he removed the specimen and dragged in one which, though having remnants of
the starfish arrangements at both ends, was badly crushed and partly disrupted
along one of the great torso furrows.

Results, quickly reported over the wireless, were baffling and provocative
indeed. Nothing like delicacy or accuracy was possible with instruments hardly
able to cut the anomalous tissue, but the little that was achieved left us all
awed and bewildered. Existing biology would have to be wholly revised, for
this thing was no product of any cell growth science knows about. There had
been scarcely any mineral replacement, and despite an age of perhaps forty
million years, the internal organs were wholly intact. The leathery,
undeteriorative, and almost indestructible quality was an inherent attribute
of the thing’s form of organization, and pertained to some paleogean cycle of
invertebrate evolution utterly beyond our powers of speculation. At first all
that Lake found was dry, but as the heated tent produced its thawing effect,
organic moisture of pungent and offensive odor was encountered toward the
thing’s uninjured side. It was not blood, but a thick, dark-green fluid
apparently answering the same purpose. By the time Lake reached this stage,
all thirty-seven dogs had been brought to the still uncompleted corral near
the camp, and even at that distance set up a savage barking and show of
restlessness at the acrid, diffusive smell.

Far from helping to place the strange entity, this provisional dissection
merely deepened its mystery. All guesses about its external members had been
correct, and on the evidence of these one could hardly hesitate to call the
thing animal; but internal inspection brought up so many vegetable evidences
that Lake was left hopelessly at sea. It had digestion and circulation, and
eliminated waste matter through the reddish tubes of its starfish-shaped
base. Cursorily, one would say that its respiration apparatus handled oxygen
rather than carbon dioxide, and there were odd evidences of air-storage
chambers and methods of shifting respiration from the external orifice to at
least two other fully developed breathing systems - gills and pores. Clearly,
it was amphibian, and probably adapted to long airless hibernation periods as
well. Vocal organs seemed present in connection with the main respiratory
system, but they presented anomalies beyond immediate solution. Articulate
speech, in the sense of syllable utterance, seemed barely conceivable, but
musical piping notes covering a wide range were highly probable. The muscular
system was almost prematurely developed.

The nervous system was so complex and highly developed as to leave Lake
aghast. Though excessively primitive and archaic in some respects, the thing
had a set of ganglial centers and connectives arguing the very extremes of
specialized development. Its five-lobed brain was surprisingly advanced, and
there were signs of a sensory equipment, served in part through the wiry cilia
of the head, involving factors alien to any other terrestrial
organism. Probably it has more than five senses, so that its habits could not
be predicted from any existing analogy. It must, Lake thought, have been a
creature of keen sensitiveness and delicately differentiated functions in its
primal world - much like the ants and bees of today. It reproduced like the
vegetable cryptogams, especially the Pteridophyta, having spore cases at the
tips of the wings and evidently developing from a thallus or prothallus.

But to give it a name at this stage was mere folly. It looked like a radiate,
but was clearly something more. It was partly vegetable, but had three-fourths
of the essentials of animal structure. That it was marine in origin, its
symmetrical contour and certain other attributes clearly indicated; yet one
could not be exact as to the limit of its later adaptations. The wings, after
all, held a persistent suggestion of the aerial. How it could have undergone
its tremendously complex evolution on a new-born earth in time to leave prints
in Archaean rocks was so far beyond conception as to make Lake whimsically
recall the primal myths about Great Old Ones who filtered down from the stars
and concocted earth life as a joke or mistake; and the wild tales of cosmic
hill things from outside told by a folklorist colleague in Miskatonic’s
English department.

Naturally, he considered the possibility of the pre-Cambrian prints having
been made by a less evolved ancestor of the present specimens, but quickly
rejected this too-facile theory upon considering the advanced structural
qualities of the older fossils. If anything, the later contours showed
decadence rather than higher evolution. The size of the pseudofeet had
decreased, and the whole morphology seemed coarsened and simplified. Moreover,
the nerves and organs just examined held singular suggestions of retrogression
from forms still more complex. Atrophied and vestigial parts were surprisingly
prevalent. Altogether, little could be said to have been solved; and Lake fell
back on mythology for a provisional name - jocosely dubbing his finds "The
Elder Ones."

At about 2:30 A.M., having decided to postpone further work and get a little
rest, he covered the dissected organism with a tarpaulin, emerged from the
laboratory tent, and studied the intact specimens with renewed interest. The
ceaseless antarctic sun had begun to limber up their tissues a trifle, so that
the head points and tubes of two or three showed signs of unfolding; but Lake
did not believe there was any danger of immediate decomposition in the almost
subzero air. He did, however, move all the undissected specimens close
together and throw a spare tent over them in order to keep off the direct
solar rays. That would also help to keep their possible scent away from the
dogs, whose hostile unrest was really becoming a problem, even at their
substantial distance and behind the higher and higher snow walls which an
increased quota of the men were hastening to raise around their quarters. He
had to weight down the corners of the tent cloth with heavy blocks of snow to
hold it in place amidst the rising gale, for the titan mountains seemed about
to deliver some gravely severe blasts. Early apprehensions about sudden
antarctic winds were revived, and under Atwood’s supervision precautions were
taken to bank the tents, new dog corral, and crude aeroplane shelters with
snow on the mountainward side. These latter shelters, begun with hard snow
blocks during odd moments, were by no means as high as they should have been;
and Lake finally detached all hands from other tasks to work on them.

It was after four when Lake at last prepared to sign off and advised us all to
share the rest period his outfit would take when the shelter walls were a
little higher. He held some friendly chat with Pabodie over the ether, and
repeated his praise of the really marvelous drills that had helped him make
his discovery. Atwood also sent greetings and praises. I gave Lake a warm word
of congratulations, owning up that he was right about the western trip, and we
all agreed to get in touch by wireless at ten in the morning. If the gale was
then over, Lake would send a plane for the party at my base. Just before
retiring I dispatched a final message to the Arkham with instructions about
toning down the day’s news for the outside world, since the full details
seemed radical enough to rouse a wave of incredulity until further
substantiated.

III

None of us, I imagine, slept very heavily or continuously that morning. Both
the excitement of Lake’s discovery and the mounting fury of the wind were
against such a thing. So savage was the blast, even where we were, that we
could not help wondering how much worse it was at Lake’s camp, directly under
the vast unknown peaks that bred and delivered it. McTighe was awake at ten
o’clock and tried to get Lake on the wireless, as agreed, but some electrical
condition in the disturbed air to the westward seemed to prevent
communication. We did, however, get the Arkham, and Douglas told me that he
had likewise been vainly trying to reach Lake. He had not known about the
wind, for very little was blowing at McMurdo Sound, despite its persistent
rage where we were.

Throughout the day we all listened anxiously and tried to get Lake at
intervals, but invariably without results. About noon a positive frenzy of
wind stampeded out of the west, causing us to fear for the safety of our camp;
but it eventually died down, with only a moderate relapse at 2 P.M. After
three o’clock it was very quiet, and we redoubled our efforts to get
Lake. Reflecting that he had four planes, each provided with an excellent
short-wave outfit, we could not imagine any ordinary accident capable of
crippling all his wireless equipment at once. Nevertheless the stony silence
continued, and when we thought of the delirious force the wind must have had
in his locality we could not help making the more direful conjectures.

By six o’clock our fears had become intense and definite, and after a wireless
consultation with Douglas and Thorfinnssen I resolved to take steps toward
investigation. The fifth aeroplane, which we had left at the McMurdo Sound
supply cache with Sherman and two sailors, was in good shape and ready for
instant use, and it seemed that the very emergency for which it had been saved
was now upon us. I got Sherman by wireless and ordered him to join me with the
plane and the two sailors at the southern base as quickly as possible, the air
conditions being apparently highly favorable. We then talked over the
personnel of the coming investigation party, and decided that we would include
all hands, together with the sledge and dogs which I had kept with me. Even so
great a load would not be too much for one of the huge planes built to our
special orders for heavy machinery transportation. At intervals I still tried
to reach Lake with the wireless, but all to no purpose.

Sherman, with the sailors Gunnarsson and Larsen, took off at 7:30, and
reported a quiet flight from several points on the wing. They arrived at our
base at midnight, and all hands at once discussed the next move. It was risky
business sailing over the antarctic in a single aeroplane without any line of
bases, but no one drew back from what seemed like the plainest necessity. We
turned in at two o’clock for a brief rest after some preliminary loading of
the plane, but were up again in four hours to finish the loading and packing.

At 7:15 A.M., January 25th, we started flying northwestward under McTighe’s
pilotage with ten men, seven dogs, a sledge, a fuel and food supply, and other
items including the plane’s wireless outfit. The atmosphere was clear, fairly
quiet, and relatively mild in temperature, and we anticipated very little
trouble in reaching the latitude and longitude designated by Lake as the site
of his camp. Our apprehensions were over what we might find, or fail to find,
at the end of our journey, for silence continued to answer all calls
dispatched to the camp.

Every incident of that four-and-a-half-hour flight is burned into my
recollection because of its crucial position in my life. It marked my loss, at
the age of fifty-four, of all that peace and balance which the normal mind
possesses through its accustomed conception of external nature and nature’s
laws. Thenceforward the ten of us - but the student Danforth and myself above
all others - were to face a hideously amplified world of lurking horrors which
nothing can erase from our emotions, and which we would refrain from sharing
with mankind in general if we could. The newspapers have printed the bulletins
we sent from the moving plane, telling of our nonstop course, our two battles
with treacherous upper-air gales, our glimpse of the broken surface where Lake
had sunk his mid-journey shaft three days before, and our sight of a group of
those strange fluffy snow cylinders noted by Amundsen and Byrd as rolling in
the wind across the endless leagues of frozen plateau. There came a point,
though, when our sensations could not be conveyed in any words the press would
understand, and a latter point when we had to adopt an actual rule of strict
censorship.

The sailor Larsen was first to spy the jagged line of witchlike cones and
pinnacles ahead, and his shouts sent everyone to the windows of the great
cabined plane. Despite our speed, they were very slow in gaining prominence;
hence we knew that they must be infinitely far off, and visible only because
of their abnormal height. Little by little, however, they rose grimly into the
western sky; allowing us to distinguish various bare, bleak, blackish summits,
and to catch the curious sense of fantasy which they inspired as seen in the
reddish antarctic light against the provocative background of iridescent
ice-dust clouds. In the whole spectacle there was a persistent, pervasive hint
of stupendous secrecy and potential revelation. It was as if these stark,
nightmare spires marked the pylons of a frightful gateway into forbidden
spheres of dream, and complex gulfs of remote time, space, and
ultra-dimensionality. I could not help feeling that they were evil things -
mountains of madness whose farther slopes looked out over some accursed
ultimate abyss. That seething, half-luminous cloud background held ineffable
suggestions of a vague, ethereal beyondness far more than terrestrially
spatial, and gave appalling reminders of the utter remoteness, separateness,
desolation, and aeon-long death of this untrodden and unfathomed austral
world.

It was young Danforth who drew our notice to the curious regularities of the
higher mountain skyline - regularities like clinging fragments of perfect
cubes, which Lake had mentioned in his messages, and which indeed justified
his comparison with the dreamlike suggestions of primordial temple ruins, on
cloudy Asian mountaintops so subtly and strangely painted by Roerich. There
was indeed something hauntingly Roerich-like about this whole unearthly
continent of mountainous mystery. I had felt it in October when we first
caught sight of Victoria Land, and I felt it afresh now. I felt, too, another
wave of uneasy consciousness of Archaean mythical resemblances; of how
disturbingly this lethal realm corresponded to the evilly famed plateau of
Leng in the primal writings. Mythologists have placed Leng in Central Asia;
but the racial memory of man - or of his predecessors - is long, and it may
well be that certain tales have come down from lands and mountains and temples
of horror earlier than Asia and earlier than any human world we know. A few
daring mystics have hinted at a pre-Pleistocene origin for the fragmentary
Pnakotic Manuscripts, and have suggested that the devotees of Tsathoggua were
as alien to mankind as Tsathoggua itself. Leng, wherever in space or time it
might brood, was not a region I would care to be in or near, nor did I relish
the proximity of a world that had ever bred such ambiguous and Archaean
monstrosities as those Lake had just mentioned. At the moment I felt sorry
that I had ever read the abhorred Necronomicon, or talked so much with that
unpleasantly erudite folklorist Wilmarth at the university.

This mood undoubtedly served to aggravate my reaction to the bizarre mirage
which burst upon us from the increasingly opalescent zenith as we drew near
the mountains and began to make out the cumulative undulations of the
foothills. I had seen dozens of polar mirages during the preceding weeks, some
of them quite as uncanny and fantastically vivid as the present example; but
this one had a wholly novel and obscure quality of menacing symbolism, and I
shuddered as the seething labyrinth of fabulous walls and towers and minarets
loomed out of the troubled ice vapors above our heads.

The effect was that of a Cyclopean city of no architecture known to man or to
human imagination, with vast aggregations of night-black masonry embodying
monstrous perversions of geometrical laws. There were truncated cones,
sometimes terraced or fluted, surmounted by tall cylindrical shafts here and
there bulbously enlarged and often capped with tiers of thinnish scalloped
disks; and strange beetling, table-like constructions suggesting piles of
multitudinous rectangular slabs or circular plates or five-pointed stars with
each one overlapping the one beneath. There were composite cones and pyramids
either alone or surmounting cylinders or cubes or flatter truncated cones and
pyramids, and occasional needle-like spires in curious clusters of five. All
of these febrile structures seemed knit together by tubular bridges crossing
from one to the other at various dizzy heights, and the implied scale of the
whole was terrifying and oppressive in its sheer gigantism. The general type
of mirage was not unlike some of the wilder forms observed and drawn by the
arctic whaler Scoresby in 1820, but at this time and place, with those dark,
unknown mountain peaks soaring stupendously ahead, that anomalous elder-world
discovery in our minds, and the pall of probable disaster enveloping the
greater part of our expedition, we all seemed to find in it a taint of latent
malignity and infinitely evil portent.

I was glad when the mirage began to break up, though in the process the
various nightmare turrets and cones assumed distorted, temporary forms of even
vaster hideousness. As the whole illusion dissolved to churning opalescence we
began to look earthward again, and saw that our journey’s end was not far
off. The unknown mountains ahead rose dizzily up like a fearsome rampart of
giants, their curious regularities showing with startling clearness even
without a field glass. We were over the lowest foothills now, and could see
amidst the snow, ice, and bare patches of their main plateau a couple of
darkish spots which we took to be Lake’s camp and boring. The higher foothills
shot up between five and six miles away, forming a range almost distinct from
the terrifying line of more than Himalayan peaks beyond them. At length Ropes
- the student who had relieved McTighe at the controls - began to head
downward toward the left-hand dark spot whose size marked it as the camp. As
he did so, McTighe sent out the last uncensored wireless message the world was
to receive from our expedition.

Everyone, of course, has read the brief and unsatisfying bulletins of the rest
of our antarctic sojourn. Some hours after our landing we sent a guarded
report of the tragedy we found, and reluctantly announced the wiping out of
the whole Lake party by the frightful wind of the preceding day, or of the
night before that. Eleven known dead, young Gedney missing. People pardoned
our hazy lack of details through realization of the shock the sad event must
have caused us, and believed us when we explained that the mangling action of
the wind had rendered all eleven bodies unsuitable for transportation
outside. Indeed, I flatter myself that even in the midst of our distress,
utter bewilderment, and soul-clutching horror, we scarcely went beyond the
truth in any specific instance. The tremendous significance lies in what we
dared not tell; what I would not tell now but for the need of warning others
off from nameless terrors.

It is a fact that the wind had brought dreadful havoc. Whether all could have
lived through it, even without the other thing, is gravely open to doubt. The
storm, with its fury of madly driven ice particles, must have been beyond
anything our expedition had encountered before. One aeroplane shelter-wall, it
seems, had been left in a far too flimsy and inadequate state - was nearly
pulverized - and the derrick at the distant boring was entirely shaken to
pieces. The exposed metal of the grounded planes and drilling machinery was
bruised into a high polish, and two of the small tents were flattened despite
their snow banking. Wooden surfaces left out in the blaster were pitted and
denuded of paint, and all signs of tracks in the snow were completely
obliterated. It is also true that we found none of the Archaean biological
objects in a condition to take outside as a whole. We did gather some minerals
from a vast, tumbled pile, including several of the greenish soapstone
fragments whose odd five-pointed rounding and faint patterns of grouped dots
caused so many doubtful comparisons; and some fossil bones, among which were
the most typical of the curiously injured specimens.

None of the dogs survived, their hurriedly built snow inclosure near the camp
being almost wholly destroyed. The wind may have done that, though the greater
breakage on the side next the camp, which was not the windward one, suggests
an outward leap or break of the frantic beasts themselves. All three sledges
were gone, and we have tried to explain that the wind may have blown them off
into the unknown. The drill and ice-melting machinery at the boring were too
badly damaged to warrant salvage, so we used them to choke up that subtly
disturbing gateway to the past which Lake had blasted. We likewise left at the
camp the two most shaken up of the planes; since our surviving party had only
four real pilots - Sherman, Danforth, McTighe, and Ropes - in all, with
Danforth in a poor nervous shape to navigate. We brought back all the books,
scientific equipment, and other incidentals we could find, though much was
rather unaccountably blown away. Spare tents and furs were either missing or
badly out of condition.

It was approximately 4 P.M., after wide plane cruising had forced us to give
Gedney up for lost, that we sent our guarded message to the Arkham for
relaying; and I think we did well to keep it as calm and noncommittal as we
succeeded in doing. The most we said about agitation concerned our dogs, whose
frantic uneasiness near the biological specimens was to be expected from poor
Lake’s accounts. We did not mention, I think, their display of the same
uneasiness when sniffing around the queer greenish soapstones and certain
other objects in the disordered region-objects including scientific
instruments, aeroplanes, and machinery, both at the camp and at the boring,
whose parts had been loosened, moved, or otherwise tampered with by winds that
must have harbored singular curiosity and investigativeness.

About the fourteen biological specimens, we were pardonably indefinite. We
said that the only ones we discovered were damaged, but that enough was left
of them to prove Lake’s description wholly and impressively accurate. It was
hard work keeping our personal emotions out of this matter - and we did not
mention numbers or say exactly how we had found those which we did find. We
had by that time agreed not to transmit anything suggesting madness on the
part of Lake’s men, and it surely looked like madness to find six imperfect
monstrosities carefully buried upright in nine-foot snow graves under
five-pointed mounds punched over with groups of dots in patterns exactly those
on the queer greenish soapstones dug up from Mesozoic or Tertiary times. The
eight perfect specimens mentioned by Lake seemed to have been completely blown
away.

We were careful, too, about the public’s general peace of mind; hence Danforth
and I said little about that frightful trip over the mountains the next
day. It was the fact that only a radically lightened plane could possibly
cross a range of such height, which mercifully limited that scouting tour to
the two of us. On our return at one A.M., Danforth was close to hysterics, but
kept an admirably stiff upper lip. It took no persuasion to make him promise
not to show our sketches and the other things we brought away in our pockets,
not to say anything more to the others than what we had agreed to relay
outside, and to hide our camera films for private development later on; so
that part of my present story will be as new to Pabodie, McTighe, Ropes,
Sherman, and the rest as it will be to the world in general. Indeed, Danforth
is closer mouthed than I: for he saw, or thinks he saw, one thing he will not
tell even me.

As all know, our report included a tale of a hard ascent - a confirmation of
Lake’s opinion that the great peaks are of Archaean slate and other very
primal crumpled strata unchanged since at least middle Comanchian times; a
conventional comment on the regularity of the clinging cube and rampart
formations; a decision that the cave mouths indicate dissolved calcaerous
veins; a conjecture that certain slopes and passes would permit of the scaling
and crossing of the entire range by seasoned mountaineers; and a remark that
the mysterious other side holds a lofty and immense superplateau as ancient
and unchanging as the mountains themselves - twenty thousand feet in
elevation, with grotesque rock formations protruding through a thin glacial
layer and with low gradual foothills between the general plateau surface and
the sheer precipices of the highest peaks.

This body of data is in every respect true so far as it goes, and it
completely satisfied the men at the camp. We laid our absence of sixteen hours
- a longer time than our announced flying, landing, reconnoitering, and
rock-collecting program called for - to a long mythical spell of adverse wind
conditions, and told truly of our landing on the farther
foothills. Fortunately our tale sounded realistic and prosaic enough not to
tempt any of the others into emulating our flight. Had any tried to do that, I
would have used every ounce of my persuasion to stop them - and I do not know
what Danforth would have done. While we were gone, Pabodie, Sherman, Ropes,
McTighe, and Williamson had worked like beavers over Lake’s two best planes,
fitting them again for use despite the altogether unaccountable juggling of
their operative mechanism.

We decided to load all the planes the next morning and start back for our old
base as soon as possible. Even though indirect, that was the safest way to
work toward McMurdo Sound; for a straightline flight across the most utterly
unknown stretches of the aeon-dead continent would involve many additional
hazards. Further exploration was hardly feasible in view of our tragic
decimation and the ruin of our drilling machinery. The doubts and horrors
around us - which we did not reveal - made us wish only to escape from this
austral world of desolation and brooding madness as swiftly as we could.

As the public knows, our return to the world was accomplished without further
disasters. All planes reached the old base on the evening of the next day -
January 27th - after a swift nonstop flight; and on the 28th we made McMurdo
Sound in two laps, the one pause being very brief, and occasioned by a faulty
rudder in the furious wind over the ice shelf after we had cleared the great
plateau. In five days more, the Arkham and Miskatonic, with all hands and
equipment on board, were shaking clear of the thickening field ice and working
up Ross Sea with the mocking mountains of Victoria Land looming westward
against a troubled antarctic sky and twisting the wind’s wails into a
wide-ranged musical piping which chilled my soul to the quick. Less than a
fortnight later we left the last hint of polar land behind us and thanked
heaven that we were clear of a haunted, accursed realm where life and death,
space and time, have made black and blasphemous alliances, in the unknown
epochs since matter first writhed and swam on the planet’s scarce-cooled
crust.

Since our return we have all constantly worked to discourage antarctic
exploration, and have kept certain doubts and guesses to ourselves with
splendid unity and faithfulness. Even young Danforth, with his nervous
breakdown, has not flinched or babbled to his doctors - indeed, as I have
said, there is one thing he thinks he alone saw which he will not tell even
me, though I think it would help his psychological state if he would consent
to do so. It might explain and relieve much, though perhaps the thing was no
more than the delusive aftermath of an earlier shock. That is the impression I
gather after those rare, irresponsible moments when he whispers disjointed
things to me - things which he repudiates vehemently as soon as he gets a grip
on himself again.

It will be hard work deterring others from the great white south, and some of
our efforts may directly harm our cause by drawing inquiring notice. We might
have known from the first that human curiosity is undying, and that the
results we announced would be enough to spur others ahead on the same age-long
pursuit of the unknown. Lake’s reports of those biological monstrosities had
aroused naturalists and paleontologists to the highest pitch, though we were
sensible enough not to show the detached parts we had taken from the actual
buried specimens, or our photographs of those specimens as they were found. We
also refrained from showing the more puzzling of the scarred bones and
greenish soapstones; while Danforth and I have closely guarded the pictures we
took or drew on the superplateau across the range, and the crumpled things we
smoothed, studied in terror, and brought away in our pockets.

But now that Starkweather-Moore party is organizing, and with a thoroughness
far beyond anything our outfit attempted. If not dissuaded, they will get to
the innermost nucleus of the antarctic and melt and bore till they bring up
that which we know may end the world. So I must break through all reticences
at last - even about that ultimate, nameless thing beyond the mountains of
madness.

IV

It is only with vast hesitancy and repugnance that I let my mind go back to
Lake’s camp and what we really found there - and to that other thing beyond
the mountains of madness. I am constantly tempted to shirk the details, and to
let hints stand for actual facts and ineluctable deductions. I hope I have
said enough already to let me glide briefly over the rest; the rest, that is,
of the horror at the camp. I have told of the wind-ravaged terrain, the
damaged shelters, the disarranged machinery, the varied uneasiness of our
dogs, the missing sledges and other items, the deaths of men and dogs, the
absence of Gedney, and the six insanely buried biological specimens, strangely
sound in texture for all their structural injuries, from a world forty million
years dead. I do not recall whether I mentioned that upon checking up the
canine bodies we found one dog missing. We did not think much about that till
later - indeed, only Danforth and I have thought of it at all.

The principal things I have been keeping back relate to the bodies, and to
certain subtle points which may or may not lend a hideous and incredible kind
of rationale to the apparent chaos. At the time, I tried to keep the men’s
minds off those points; for it was so much simpler - so much more normal - to
lay everything to an outbreak of madness on the part of some of Lake’s
party. From the look of things, that demon mountain wind must have been enough
to drive any man mad in the midst of this center of all earthly mystery and
desolation.

The crowning abnormality, of course, was the condition of the bodies - men and
dogs alike. They had all been in some terrible kind of conflict, and were torn
and mangled in fiendish and altogether inexplicable ways. Death, so far as we
could judge, had in each case come from strangulation or laceration. The dogs
had evidently started the trouble, for the state of their ill-built corral
bore witness to its forcible breakage from within. It had been set some
distance from the camp because of the hatred of the animals for those hellish
Archaean organisms, but the precaution seemed to have been taken in vain. When
left alone in that monstrous wind, behind flimsy walls of insufficient height,
they must have stampeded - whether from the wind itself, or from some subtle,
increasing odor emitted by the nightmare specimens, one could not say.

But whatever had happened, it was hideous and revolting enough. Perhaps I had
better put squeamishness aside and tell the worst at last - though with a
categorical statement of opinion, based on the first-hand observations and
most rigid deductions of both Danforth and myself, that the then missing
Gedney was in no way responsible for the loathsome horrors we found. I have
said that the bodies were frightfully mangled. Now I must add that some were
incised and subtracted from in the most curious, cold-blooded, and inhuman
fashion. It was the same with dogs and men. All the healthier, fatter bodies,
quadrupedal or bipedal, had had their most solid masses of tissue cut out and
removed, as by a careful butcher; and around them was a strange sprinkling of
salt - taken from the ravaged provision chests on the planes - which conjured
up the most horrible associations. The thing had occurred in one of the crude
aeroplane shelters from which the plane had been dragged out, and subsequent
winds had effaced all tracks which could have supplied any plausible
theory. Scattered bits of clothing, roughly slashed from the human incision
subjects, hinted no clues. It is useless to bring up the half impression of
certain faint snow prints in one shielded corner of the ruined inclosure -
because that impression did not concern human prints at all, but was clearly
mixed up with all the talk of fossil prints which poor Lake had been giving
throughout the preceding weeks. One had to be careful of one’s imagination in
the lee of those overshadowing mountains of madness.

As I have indicated, Gedney and one dog turned out to be missing in the
end. When we came on that terrible shelter we had missed two dogs and two men;
but the fairly unharmed dissecting tent, which we entered after investigating
the monstrous graves, had something to reveal. It was not as Lake had left it,
for the covered parts of the primal monstrosity had been removed from the
improvised 